now we're going to talk about physical digital devices so it there are no real digital devices
everything in this world is analog so we sort of layer an abstraction on top of an analog world
and so think of digital as analog systems that are built to have two relatively stable states
and they require some kind of an input to change the state but once the state is changed
it's stable again okay so it there's a state state transition so if we look at a pen by the way
capturing the new state the technical term for that is called latching you know you here comes a
change state you like latch it you grab it and you keep it and then the stable time is when you've
kept the state so you often find at least in physical digital devices that there is a clicking
associated with it so here's a pen a retractable pen all right there you go retractable pen
click click click click okay now so we'll decide that zero is when it's retracted and one is when
it's not and so it's stable i don't have to touch it to keep the one and when it's zero i don't have
to touch it to keep the zero but it's also you have to put input to switch it from zero to one
but if you don't push it far enough it goes back to zero so zero is stable and slight variations
of input does not disturb the zero it comes back to zero but if you put enough input hear the click
then it's a one right and so there is a two states and a transition period and that transition period
is when there is some input required to change the state and so that is the notion of digital
we call one of the states one and one of the states zero so a classic use of this for
hundreds of years is clocks so clocks are sort of a digital where the pendulum would go back and
forth tick tock tick tock and then inside of it a little gear would move for each second and then
that would count up the seconds to make a minute and then count up to minutes to make an hour with
a series of gears very much like the antikythera mechanism and what's even cooler for a cuckoo clock
is that at particular moments in time it runs a little mechanical program to make a little birdie
come out and tweet so cuckoo clocks are an early form of of programming that's all hardware and
all analog but it's analog digital because of the tick tock and the counters that count the ticks
and the tocks so another device that is a counter that carries and frankly this device could be the
inside of a cuckoo clock it's just a little easier for us to understand it so what these are let me
show you close up here so these are little devices that are used for shopping and they have dollars
let me get my pen here they have dollars dimes and cents and if you're going to buy something for
15 cents you can put the five in for five cents and then one in and then I buy something for
25 cents put two dimes and five five cents and it's carrying all along okay now how does this work it
is a physical digital device you can see that it's clicking so let's take a look inside the device
so here's the inside of the device and you can see right away that there is some springs in here
each one has a spring and there's a specific shape of the of the thing we're pushing down and there's
some flexibility in it so all of this is to get to the point where we can press an input and that
input changes it right so if I press it down it doesn't quite change that's the old stable part
but if I press it far enough it clicks and then it changes now we're about to see we're on nine
right now you want to click one more time and we're going to see the carry this is a ripple carry
we're going to learn about later in half adders and full adders we're going to learn about ripple
carry but you can watch as the ripple carry happens this little white thing here is going to
go up and push it's going to act as if it pushed the middle one it's going to move it but instead
pushing the sense is going to oops I pushed the wrong one pushing the sense is going to move that
so if I go around and do 10 more of these you'll see it'll come down it's seven and now it's clicked
to eight so that that's how we carry when we get beyond 10 and so this notion of ripple carry and
multiple values we're going to build this into actually electronic hardware coming up so once
you can build an adding machine with some kind of iteration you can turn addition into multiplication
and that's because multiplication is merely repeated addition now I don't have a multiplier
but I do have a an adder that's a little tougher this is metal it's many things it can do addition
it can do subtraction and then eventually you would put something like this with a motor on it
or a crank on it and then you could build a physical mechanical multiplier addition and
subtraction and multiplication are not the only things that we needed to do we need to do things
like logarithms sine and cosine and today we would just use a hand calculator and we put in whatever
and we click the sign button and out it comes now that does someone in the 1930s would be a miracle
that you can ask for the sine or cosine or logarithm of any number and it just comes out
on a little screen this is more powerful than any computer in 1930 so what they had to do though
those functions are still there sine and cosine and logarithms have to do with things like curves
and the motion of spacecraft etc and so we needed to know all this stuff so there's a couple ways
to do it now one of the things we talked about already with logarithms was the fact that we have
a slide rule and the slide rules so slide rule upside no slide rule is not upside down the slide
rule that basically just converts linear numbers to logarithmic numbers and then it uses sliding
and addition adding by moving along this line that equates to multiplication so logarithms we we in
in the 30s 40s and 50s we use slide rules with carefully crafted scales and movement to turn the
more complex multiplication into addition but for things like sine and cosine and just looking up
logarithms a little more precisely we basically created this book we had this book standard
mathematical tables and this was a thing you every engineer would buy and if you wanted to
look logarithms up this is a book of four place decimal common logarithms and you would look things
up and you would find four or five digits of precision and if you keep going you got logarithms
of trigonometric functions square sine and cosine in their product hyperbolic functions okay we
didn't want to know that stuff integrals okay so this was the way you did complex calculations
before we had hand calculators this is all replaced for all intents and purposes
by modern hand calculators but the transistor hasn't been invented yet now there were devices
that were designed in a sense to create that book the babbage difference engine was something that
was imagined in the 1820s that was had gears and little cogs little carry adders just like the stuff
we just saw that could compute up to seventh order polynomials like x to the seventh x to the six x
the fifth and the reason that was so important is you can approximate a lot of functions using
polynomials with various constants on those polynomials so if you could put a seventh order
polynomial into this machine and then run it for a while you could generate a table of sine or
different polynomial would generate a table of cosine or logarithms and the cool thing about
this is this was designed to actually have a printer which would do the computation and then
print the result out so that you could make a book out of this thing and and charles babbage
designed it all in the 1800s and he built a tiny prototype but turns out that you know ran out of
money ran out of time a full-scale system based on his designs was built in 1991 and it worked
exactly as babbage expected it it was intended to be powered by a steam engine although
if you ever see one running usually it's a human that's cranking it
now another way that we built the content of these tables in these books is using computers
except in the early days computer was a word for a job description for a human being
so the idea of a computer is they would have some kind of calculator probably could do addition and
multiplication and this person would carefully put numbers in run the calculator and compute
using some of those polynomial things often sign and log and then record the results and these
these rooms full of people would do these calculations over and over and over for different input values
and get the output values for various functions and then write them down and that's what built
human computers built many of the early data in or these early books now computers when computers
started electronic computers started to happen it was natural to think of the task that these
electronic computers were doing as very similar to the task the repetitive tasks that the human
computers were doing and so that's how things we call computers today were named computers
they're named after people and the movie one of my favorite movies hidden figures explores the
shift from sort of human to electronic computers where they were a bunch of people and they were
doing human computer work and then they moved into the electronic computer work and using Fortran etc.